DISTANCE & PITCH CONFIGURATION

These configurations are based on Leo Theremin's original design

the right hand controls the pitch (the musical note), and the left hand controls the volume

Frequency Range

The minimum value of the pitch is 0 hz when the distance between the sensor and the hand is 0mm. 

NOTE: This might be difficult to achieve practically because of physical contraints.

The maximum pitch when the distance is 350 mm is 2000 hz.

The default freq when there is no hand it should be 440hz

Amplitude Range

At a distance of 0 mm the amplitude will be bare minimum and close to silent.

At a distnace of 350 mm the amplitude will be maximum.

The default amplitude when there is no hand it should be maximum

If you are not able to detect the longer distances then below might be causing it.

1️⃣ What the VL53L0X actually does (internally)

The VL53L0X is a time-of-flight (ToF) sensor:

It emits very short infrared laser pulses

Light reflects off the target

The sensor measures how long photons take to return

Distance = time × speed of light / 2

At short distances, the return signal is:

strong

clean

arrives quickly

At long distances, the return signal is:

much weaker (light spreads + absorbs)

noisy

mixed with background IR (sunlight, reflections)

2️⃣ Why increasing range works

When you changed the code, you did two critical things:

A) Increased the measurement timing budget
lox.setMeasurementTimingBudgetMicroSeconds(33000);


This means:

“Spend more time per measurement collecting and integrating photons.”

Internally:

the sensor sends more pulses

averages more samples

waits longer for weak reflections

improves signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

👉 Weak, far-away reflections become detectable

B) Switched to a high-accuracy profile
lox.configSensor(VL53L0X_SENSE_HIGH_ACCURACY);


This:

increases internal averaging

uses stricter validation logic

prefers accuracy over speed

👉 Noisy far readings are less likely to be discarded

3️⃣ Why the sensor couldn’t see far before

With short timing budgets (e.g. 10–14 ms):

The sensor gives up early

If photons don’t return fast/strong enough → reading marked invalid

Long distances look like “nothing came back”

So the sensor wasn’t “blind” — it was just impatient.

4️⃣ The trade-offs (this is the important part)
⚖️ Trade-off #1: Speed vs Range
Timing budget	Effect
Low (10–15 ms)	Fast updates, short range
Medium (20–30 ms)	Balanced
High (33–50 ms)	Longer range, slower updates

Example:

10 ms budget → ~100 Hz max

33 ms budget → ~30 Hz max

50 ms budget → ~20 Hz max

You get longer distance, but slower reaction time

PYTHON SCRIPT BRIDGE

The python bridge script is important because Supercollider does not read BAUD RATES above 203400.

At 203400, ESP32 prints serial data with noise causing irregularitories.

So, we wrote a python script to input the serial data 406800 and send the input data as an OSC message to over the serial port 57120

